ebook/en/content/000-introduction.md, before:

# About the book

* **This version was published on May 18 2021**

This is an open-source introduction to SQL guide that will help you learn the basics of SQL and start using relational databases for your SysOps, DevOps, and Dev projects. No matter if you are a DevOps/SysOps engineer, developer, or just a Linux enthusiast, you will most likely have to use SQL at some point in your career.

The guide is suitable for anyone working as a developer, system administrator, or a DevOps engineer and wants to learn the basics of SQL.

## About the author

My name is Bobby Iliev, and I have been working as a Linux DevOps Engineer since 2014. I am an avid Linux lover and supporter of the open-source movement philosophy. I am always doing that which I cannot do in order that I may learn how to do it, and I believe in sharing knowledge.

I think it's essential always to keep professional and surround yourself with good people, work hard, and be nice to everyone. You have to perform at a consistently higher level than others. That's the mark of a true professional.

For more information, please visit my blog at [https://bobbyiliev.com](https://bobbyiliev.com), follow me on Twitter [@bobbyiliev_](https://twitter.com/bobbyiliev_) and [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQWmdHTeAO0UvaNqve9udRw).

## Sponsors

This book is made possible thanks to these fantastic companies!

### DigitalOcean

DigitalOcean is a cloud services platform delivering the simplicity developers love and businesses trust to run production applications at scale.

It provides highly available, secure, and scalable compute, storage, and networking solutions that help developers build great software faster.

Founded in 2012 with offices in New York and Cambridge, MA, DigitalOcean offers transparent and affordable pricing, an elegant user interface, and one of the largest libraries of open source resources available.

For more information, please visit [https://www.digitalocean.com](https://www.digitalocean.com) or follow [@digitalocean](https://twitter.com/digitalocean) on Twitter.

If you are new to DigitalOcean, you can get a free $100 credit and spin up your own servers via this referral link here:

[Free $100 Credit For DigitalOcean](https://m.do.co/c/2a9bba940f39)

### DevDojo

The DevDojo is a resource to learn all things web development and web design. Learn on your lunch break or wake up and enjoy a cup of coffee with us to learn something new.

Join this developer community, and we can all learn together, build together, and grow together.

[Join DevDojo](https://devdojo.com?ref=bobbyiliev)

For more information, please visit [https://www.devdojo.com](https://www.devdojo.com?ref=bobbyiliev) or follow [@thedevdojo](https://twitter.com/thedevdojo) on Twitter.

## Ebook PDF Generation Tool

This ebook was generated by [Ibis](https://github.com/themsaid/ibis/) developed by [Mohamed Said](https://github.com/themsaid).

Ibis is a PHP tool that helps you write eBooks in markdown.

## Book Cover

The cover for this ebook was created with [Canva.com](https://www.canva.com/join/determined-cork-learn).

If you ever need to create a graphic, poster, invitation, logo, presentation – or anything that looks good — give Canva a go.

## License

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2020 Bobby Iliev

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Add Materialize as sponsor to eBook introduction

ebook/en/content/000-introduction.md, after:

# About the book

* **This version was published on May 18 2021**

This is an open-source introduction to SQL guide that will help you learn the basics of SQL and start using relational databases for your SysOps, DevOps, and Dev projects. No matter if you are a DevOps/SysOps engineer, developer, or just a Linux enthusiast, you will most likely have to use SQL at some point in your career.

The guide is suitable for anyone working as a developer, system administrator, or a DevOps engineer and wants to learn the basics of SQL.

## About the author

My name is Bobby Iliev, and I have been working as a Linux DevOps Engineer since 2014. I am an avid Linux lover and supporter of the open-source movement philosophy. I am always doing that which I cannot do in order that I may learn how to do it, and I believe in sharing knowledge.

I think it's essential always to keep professional and surround yourself with good people, work hard, and be nice to everyone. You have to perform at a consistently higher level than others. That's the mark of a true professional.

For more information, please visit my blog at [https://bobbyiliev.com](https://bobbyiliev.com), follow me on Twitter [@bobbyiliev_](https://twitter.com/bobbyiliev_) and [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQWmdHTeAO0UvaNqve9udRw).

## Sponsors

This book is made possible thanks to these fantastic companies!

### Materialize

The Streaming Database for Real-time Analytics.

[Materialize](https://materialize.com/) is a reactive database that delivers incremental view updates. Materialize helps developers easily build with streaming data using standard SQL.

### DigitalOcean

DigitalOcean is a cloud services platform delivering the simplicity developers love and businesses trust to run production applications at scale.

It provides highly available, secure, and scalable compute, storage, and networking solutions that help developers build great software faster.

Founded in 2012 with offices in New York and Cambridge, MA, DigitalOcean offers transparent and affordable pricing, an elegant user interface, and one of the largest libraries of open source resources available.

For more information, please visit [https://www.digitalocean.com](https://www.digitalocean.com) or follow [@digitalocean](https://twitter.com/digitalocean) on Twitter.

If you are new to DigitalOcean, you can get a free $100 credit and spin up your own servers via this referral link here:

[Free $100 Credit For DigitalOcean](https://m.do.co/c/2a9bba940f39)

### DevDojo

The DevDojo is a resource to learn all things web development and web design. Learn on your lunch break or wake up and enjoy a cup of coffee with us to learn something new.

Join this developer community, and we can all learn together, build together, and grow together.

[Join DevDojo](https://devdojo.com?ref=bobbyiliev)

For more information, please visit [https://www.devdojo.com](https://www.devdojo.com?ref=bobbyiliev) or follow [@thedevdojo](https://twitter.com/thedevdojo) on Twitter.

## Ebook PDF Generation Tool

This ebook was generated by [Ibis](https://github.com/themsaid/ibis/) developed by [Mohamed Said](https://github.com/themsaid).

Ibis is a PHP tool that helps you write eBooks in markdown.

## Book Cover

The cover for this ebook was created with [Canva.com](https://www.canva.com/join/determined-cork-learn).

If you ever need to create a graphic, poster, invitation, logo, presentation – or anything that looks good — give Canva a go.

## License

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2020 Bobby Iliev

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
