ebook/en/content/011-join.md, before:

# JOIN

The `JOIN` clause allows you to combine the data from 2 or more tables into one result set.

As we will be selecting from multiple columns, we would need to include the list of the columns that we want to select data from after the `FROM` clause separated by a comma.

In this chapter, we will go over the following `JOIN` types:

* `CROSS` Join
* `INNER` Join
* `LEFT` Join
* `RIGHT` Join

Before we get started, let's create a new database and 2 tables that we are going to work with:

* We are going to call the database `demo_joins`:

```
CREATE DATABASE demo_joins;
```

* Then switch to the new database:

```
USE demo_joins;
```

* Then the first table will be called `users` and it will only have 2 columns: `id` and `username`:

```
CREATE TABLE users
(
    id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
    username VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);
```

* Then let's create a second table called `posts`, and to keep things simple we will have three two columns: `id`, `user_id` and `title`:

```
CREATE TABLE posts
(
    id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
    user_id INT,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);
```

> The `user_id` column would be used to reference the ID of the user that the post belongs to. It is going to be a one to many relation, e.g. one user could have many post:

![One to many relation](https://imgur.com/ipIjCaL.png)

* Now, let's add some data into the two tables first by creating a few users:

```
INSERT INTO users
  ( username )
VALUES
  ('bobby'),
  ('devdojo'),
  ('tony'),
  ('greisi');
```

* And finally add some posts:

```
INSERT INTO posts
  ( user_id, title )
VALUES
  ('1', 'Hello World!'),
  ('2', 'Getting started with SQL'),
  ('3', 'SQL is awesome'),
  ('2', 'MySQL is up!'),
  ('1', 'SQL - structured query language');
```

Now that we've got our tables and demo data ready let's go ahead and learn how to use joins.

## Cross join

The `CROSS` join allows you to basically put the result of two tables next to each other without specifying any `WHERE` conditions. This makes the `CROSS` join the simplest one, but it also not of much use in a real-life scenario.

So if we were to select all of the users and all of the posts side by side, we will use the following query:

```
SELECT * FROM users CROSS JOIN posts;
```

The output will be all of your users and all of the posts side by side:

```
+----+----------+----+--------+-----------------+
| id | username | id |user_id | title           |
+----+----------+----+--------+-----------------+
|  4 | greisi   |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  3 | tony     |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  1 | bobby    |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  4 | greisi   |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  3 | tony     |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  2 | devdojo  |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  1 | bobby    |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  4 | greisi   |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  3 | tony     |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  2 | devdojo  |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  1 | bobby    |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  4 | greisi   |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  3 | tony     |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  1 | bobby    |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  4 | greisi   |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
|  3 | tony     |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
|  2 | devdojo  |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
|  1 | bobby    |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
+----+----------+----+--------+-----------------+
```

As mentioned above, in a real-life scenario, you will highly unlikely run a `CROSS` join for two whole tables. You would most likey use one of the following joins instead combined with a specific condition.

## Inner join

The `INNER` join is used to join two tables, however, unlike the `CROSS` join, it is based on a condition. By using an `INNER` join, you can match the first table to the second one.

As we have a one-to-many relationship, a best practice would be to use a primary key for the posts `id` column and a foreign key for the `user_id`; that way, we can 'link' or relate the users table to the posts table. However, this is beyond the scope of this SQL basics eBook, though I might extend it in the future and add more chapters.

As an example and to make things a bit clearer, let's say that you wanted to get all of your users and the posts associated with each user. The query that we would use will look like this:

```
SELECT * FROM users
INNER JOIN posts
ON users.id = posts.user_id;
```

Rundown of the query:

* `SELECT * FROM users`: this is a standard select that we've covered many times in the previous chapters.
* `INNER JOIN posts`: then we specify the second table, which table we want to join the result set with
* `ON users.id = posts.user_id`: finally, we specify the logic on how we want the data in these two tables to be merged together. The `user.id` is the `id` column of the `user` table, which is also the primary ID, and `posts.user_id` is the foreign key in the email address table referring to the ID column in the users table.

The output will be the following, associating each user with their post based on the `user_id` column:

```
+----+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
| id | username | id | user_id | title           |
+----+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
|  1 | bobby    |  1 |       1 | Hello World!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |  2 |       2 | Getting started |
|  3 | tony     |  3 |       3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  2 | devdojo  |  4 |       2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  1 | bobby    |  5 |       1 | SQL             |
+----+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
```

The main things that you need to keep in mind here are the `INNER JOIN` and `ON` clauses.

With the inner join, the `NULL` values are discarded. For example, if you have a user who does not have a post associated with it, when running the above `INNER` join query, the user that has NULL posts will not be displayed.

To get the null values as well, you would need to use an outer join.

## Left join

By using the `LEFT OUTER` join, you would get all rows from the first table that you've specified, and if there are no associated records with it within the second table, you will get a `NULL` value. 

In our case, we have a user called `graisi`, which is not associated with a specific post. As you can see from the output from the previous query, the `graisi` user was not present in there. To show that user even though it does not have an associated post with it, you could use a `LEFT OUTER` join:

```
SELECT *
FROM users
LEFT JOIN posts ON users.id = posts.user_id;
```

The output will look like this:

```
+----+----------+------+---------+-----------------+
| id | username | id   | user_id | title           |
+----+----------+------+---------+-----------------+
|  1 | bobby    |    1 |       1 | Hello World!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |    2 |       2 | Getting started |
|  3 | tony     |    3 |       3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  2 | devdojo  |    4 |       2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  1 | bobby    |    5 |       1 | SQL             |
|  4 | greisi   | NULL |    NULL | NULL            |
+----+----------+------+---------+-----------------+
```

## Right join

The `RIGHT OUTER` join is the exact opposite of the `LEFT OUTER` join. It will display all of the rows from the second table and give you a `NULL` value in case that it does not match with an entry from the first table.

Let's create a post that does not have a matching user id:

```
INSERT INTO posts
  ( user_id, title )
VALUES
  ('123', 'No user post!');
```

We are specifying `123` as the user ID, but we don't have such a user in our `users` table.

Now, if you were to run the `LEFT` outer join, you would not see the post as it has a null value for the corresponding `users` table.

But if you were to run a `RIGHT` outer join, you would see the post but not the `greisi` user as it does not have any posts:

```
SELECT * FROM users RIGHT JOIN posts ON users.id = posts.user_id;
```

Output:

```
+------+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
| id   | username | id | user_id | title           |
+------+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
|    1 | bobby    |  1 |       1 | Hello World!    |
|    2 | devdojo  |  2 |       2 | Getting started |
|    3 | tony     |  3 |       3 | SQL is awesome  |
|    2 | devdojo  |  4 |       2 | MySQL is up!    |
|    1 | bobby    |  5 |       1 | SQL             |
| NULL | NULL     |  6 |     123 | No user post!   |
+------+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
```

## Conclusion

The whole concept of joins might be very confusing in the beginning but would make a lot of sense once you get used to it.

The best way to wrap your head around it is to write some queries and play around with each type of `JOIN` and see how the result set changes.

For more information, you could take a look at the official documentation [here](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/join.html).

Commit message:

feature(inner-join-types) : Added Information about different types of INNER join with use cases

ebook/en/content/011-join.md, after:

# JOIN

The `JOIN` clause allows you to combine the data from 2 or more tables into one result set.

As we will be selecting from multiple columns, we would need to include the list of the columns that we want to select data from after the `FROM` clause separated by a comma.

In this chapter, we will go over the following `JOIN` types:

* `CROSS` Join
* `INNER` Join
* `LEFT` Join
* `RIGHT` Join

Before we get started, let's create a new database and 2 tables that we are going to work with:

* We are going to call the database `demo_joins`:

```
CREATE DATABASE demo_joins;
```

* Then switch to the new database:

```
USE demo_joins;
```

* Then the first table will be called `users` and it will only have 2 columns: `id` and `username`:

```
CREATE TABLE users
(
    id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
    username VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);
```

* Then let's create a second table called `posts`, and to keep things simple we will have three two columns: `id`, `user_id` and `title`:

```
CREATE TABLE posts
(
    id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
    user_id INT,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);
```

> The `user_id` column would be used to reference the ID of the user that the post belongs to. It is going to be a one to many relation, e.g. one user could have many post:

![One to many relation](https://imgur.com/ipIjCaL.png)

* Now, let's add some data into the two tables first by creating a few users:

```
INSERT INTO users
  ( username )
VALUES
  ('bobby'),
  ('devdojo'),
  ('tony'),
  ('greisi');
```

* And finally add some posts:

```
INSERT INTO posts
  ( user_id, title )
VALUES
  ('1', 'Hello World!'),
  ('2', 'Getting started with SQL'),
  ('3', 'SQL is awesome'),
  ('2', 'MySQL is up!'),
  ('1', 'SQL - structured query language');
```

Now that we've got our tables and demo data ready let's go ahead and learn how to use joins.

## Cross join

The `CROSS` join allows you to basically put the result of two tables next to each other without specifying any `WHERE` conditions. This makes the `CROSS` join the simplest one, but it also not of much use in a real-life scenario.

So if we were to select all of the users and all of the posts side by side, we will use the following query:

```
SELECT * FROM users CROSS JOIN posts;
```

The output will be all of your users and all of the posts side by side:

```
+----+----------+----+--------+-----------------+
| id | username | id |user_id | title           |
+----+----------+----+--------+-----------------+
|  4 | greisi   |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  3 | tony     |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  1 | bobby    |  1 |      1 | Hello World!    |
|  4 | greisi   |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  3 | tony     |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  2 | devdojo  |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  1 | bobby    |  2 |      2 | Getting started |
|  4 | greisi   |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  3 | tony     |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  2 | devdojo  |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  1 | bobby    |  3 |      3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  4 | greisi   |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  3 | tony     |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  1 | bobby    |  4 |      2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  4 | greisi   |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
|  3 | tony     |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
|  2 | devdojo  |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
|  1 | bobby    |  5 |      1 | SQL             |
+----+----------+----+--------+-----------------+
```

As mentioned above, in a real-life scenario, you will highly unlikely run a `CROSS` join for two whole tables. You would most likey use one of the following joins instead combined with a specific condition.

## Inner join

The `INNER` join is used to join two tables, however, unlike the `CROSS` join, it is based on a condition. By using an `INNER` join, you can match the first table to the second one.

As we have a one-to-many relationship, a best practice would be to use a primary key for the posts `id` column and a foreign key for the `user_id`; that way, we can 'link' or relate the users table to the posts table. However, this is beyond the scope of this SQL basics eBook, though I might extend it in the future and add more chapters.

As an example and to make things a bit clearer, let's say that you wanted to get all of your users and the posts associated with each user. The query that we would use will look like this:

```
SELECT * FROM users
INNER JOIN posts
ON users.id = posts.user_id;
```

Rundown of the query:

* `SELECT * FROM users`: this is a standard select that we've covered many times in the previous chapters.
* `INNER JOIN posts`: then we specify the second table, which table we want to join the result set with
* `ON users.id = posts.user_id`: finally, we specify the logic on how we want the data in these two tables to be merged together. The `user.id` is the `id` column of the `user` table, which is also the primary ID, and `posts.user_id` is the foreign key in the email address table referring to the ID column in the users table.

The output will be the following, associating each user with their post based on the `user_id` column:

```
+----+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
| id | username | id | user_id | title           |
+----+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
|  1 | bobby    |  1 |       1 | Hello World!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |  2 |       2 | Getting started |
|  3 | tony     |  3 |       3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  2 | devdojo  |  4 |       2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  1 | bobby    |  5 |       1 | SQL             |
+----+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
```

The main things that you need to keep in mind here are the `INNER JOIN` and `ON` clauses.

With the inner join, the `NULL` values are discarded. For example, if you have a user who does not have a post associated with it, when running the above `INNER` join query, the user that has NULL posts will not be displayed.

To get the null values as well, you would need to use an outer join.

### Types of Inner Join

1.  **Theta Join ( θ )** :- Theta join combines rows from different tables provided they satisfy the theta condition.
    The join condition is denoted by symbol `θ`. \
    Here the comparison operators `(≤, ≥, ˂, ˃, =, ̚ )` come into picture. \
    **Notation** :- R<sub>1</sub> ⋈<sub>θ</sub> R<sub>2</sub>. \
    \
    For example, suppose we want to buy a mobile and a laptop, based on our budget we have thought of buying both such that mobile price should be less than that of laptop. \
    \
    `SELECT mobile.model, laptop.model
    FROM mobile, laptop
    WHERE mobile.price < laptop.price;`

2.  **Equijoin** :- When Theta join uses only equality (=) comparison operator, it is said to be equijoin. \
    For example, suppose we want to buy a mobile and a laptop, based on our budget we have thought of buying both of same price. \
    \
    `SELECT mobile.model, laptop.model
    FROM mobile, laptop
    WHERE mobile.price = laptop.price;`
    
3.  **Natural Join ( ⋈ )** :- Natural join does not use any comparison operator. It does not concatenate the way a Cartesian product does. \
    We can perform a Natural Join only if there is at least one common column that exists between two tables. In addition, the column must have the same name and domain. \
    \
    `SELECT * FROM mobile NATURAL JOIN laptop;`


## Left join

By using the `LEFT OUTER` join, you would get all rows from the first table that you've specified, and if there are no associated records with it within the second table, you will get a `NULL` value. 

In our case, we have a user called `graisi`, which is not associated with a specific post. As you can see from the output from the previous query, the `graisi` user was not present in there. To show that user even though it does not have an associated post with it, you could use a `LEFT OUTER` join:

```
SELECT *
FROM users
LEFT JOIN posts ON users.id = posts.user_id;
```

The output will look like this:

```
+----+----------+------+---------+-----------------+
| id | username | id   | user_id | title           |
+----+----------+------+---------+-----------------+
|  1 | bobby    |    1 |       1 | Hello World!    |
|  2 | devdojo  |    2 |       2 | Getting started |
|  3 | tony     |    3 |       3 | SQL is awesome  |
|  2 | devdojo  |    4 |       2 | MySQL is up!    |
|  1 | bobby    |    5 |       1 | SQL             |
|  4 | greisi   | NULL |    NULL | NULL            |
+----+----------+------+---------+-----------------+
```

## Right join

The `RIGHT OUTER` join is the exact opposite of the `LEFT OUTER` join. It will display all of the rows from the second table and give you a `NULL` value in case that it does not match with an entry from the first table.

Let's create a post that does not have a matching user id:

```
INSERT INTO posts
  ( user_id, title )
VALUES
  ('123', 'No user post!');
```

We are specifying `123` as the user ID, but we don't have such a user in our `users` table.

Now, if you were to run the `LEFT` outer join, you would not see the post as it has a null value for the corresponding `users` table.

But if you were to run a `RIGHT` outer join, you would see the post but not the `greisi` user as it does not have any posts:

```
SELECT * FROM users RIGHT JOIN posts ON users.id = posts.user_id;
```

Output:

```
+------+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
| id   | username | id | user_id | title           |
+------+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
|    1 | bobby    |  1 |       1 | Hello World!    |
|    2 | devdojo  |  2 |       2 | Getting started |
|    3 | tony     |  3 |       3 | SQL is awesome  |
|    2 | devdojo  |  4 |       2 | MySQL is up!    |
|    1 | bobby    |  5 |       1 | SQL             |
| NULL | NULL     |  6 |     123 | No user post!   |
+------+----------+----+---------+-----------------+
```

## Conclusion

The whole concept of joins might be very confusing in the beginning but would make a lot of sense once you get used to it.

The best way to wrap your head around it is to write some queries and play around with each type of `JOIN` and see how the result set changes.

For more information, you could take a look at the official documentation [here](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/join.html).
